The system of inequity is embedded in
history, culture, and identity.
lt has internal components and external
components.
These components are moved or
influenced by power and economics.
The internal components consist of bias,
privilege, and internalized racism.
The external components play out in
relationships
which are interpersonal, institutional, and
structural.
All of these layers are happening
simultaneously.
And they are churning out inequities.
ln the western world, we worship the
disguise of science
All else can remain silent.
Duck the supernatural, the spiritual and
unexplained oddities
We need facts. That which you can see
and grasp. Fact.
Europe is not and has never been a
continent,
yet they teach us it all through school
So when l raise my hand in class and ask
"Ey teach, continent defined as a large
land mass,
completely or almost completely
surrounded by water.
Europe is neither large nor even almost
How is it a continent?" l get looked at like
a fool
Teach tells me, "Because it is."
Now, this never flew with me as a kid l
ain't get the answer needed,
l'm disrupting the rest of yo class period
So now l'm in the principal's office being
asked to explain,
why l'm questioning a continent's validity
Now l find myself saying, this country is
hypocrisy from top to bottom
You've raised me to focus on facts
l've done what you asked now you letting
me know l'm digging too deep
Puerto Rico, in many ways, is very
homogeneous,
in the way that it is perceived
We have taken on an essential identity,
where we're all Latinos
or we're all Puerto Ricans then we forget a
history of slavery
We forget a history of white Spaniard
domination
We forget a history of Arawak genocide,
and how that creates the Latino,
and so often we think about the Puerto
Rican or the Latino,
without thinking about the historical and
colonial legacies that have
over time constructed who we are today
My mother explained slavery to me,
and l remember, l was really, you know
like, in elementary school,
and she described slavery that people,
human beings were slaves,
and l didn't understand what she meant so
l asked her to explain that
"What, what do you mean? They had them
to do a lot of chores?"
(Laughs) Because she had us doing a lot
of chores at home
But l knew that wasn't what she meant,
but l wondered what do l compare this to?
She said, "Oh no sugar, uh uh, they
couldn't be married;
they couldn't keep their children; they
didn't have their own souls;
everything was taken from them and you
know your grandfather,"
she meant her father, "his father was a
slave." l said, "No way."
l said, "Well why did the people let
themselves be slaves?"
And she said, "Oh Ericka, it wasn't like
that;
the whole government supported it."
Then l got really sad. So sad, l don't think
l could cry about it
l just couldn't fathom, grown-ups as l
thought of them,
being that mean, just mean! l didn't have a
name for it, just mean
Hawaii was conquered by white people.
The Queen was dethroned.
Hawaiian people were put on plantations,
to work alongside Japanese people, and
Filipino, and Chinese people.
Many Hawaiians were converted to
Christianity.
There's a kind of assimilation that tries to
happen
The Hawaiian monarchy wearing English
clothes, and you know, the collars,
the dresses with the high collars.
The very Victorian, you know, English
kinds of clothes
And people kind of glorifying that royalty,
but yet, they're living in shacks
And l'm not talking about grass shacks;
l'm talking about squalor shacks, slums.
No one had ever told me in school, no had
ever told me the truth
They taught me about Crispus Attucks
Okay, you know l don't have anything
against Crispus Attucks,
but, l needed to know more than the black
men who
fought in the American Revolution, you
know. . .But l didn't get the truth
l was told watered down stories about
Native Americans,
that didn't speak any language that was
discernible.
African people that had bones through
their noses and had no language,
except " uga buga." When l realized that
this is what not only l was taught,
but all of the nation's children and people
were being taught this,
l was so pissed off.
l think there's a, a misconception that's out
there in mainstream society,
that sees our people as primitive and
uncivilized.
There was a high level of organized
society that existed around us
to the point where l would say that as
colonizers came to our land,
as the settlers came, they mimicked and
followed some of those ways,
of looking at the way that we did our
governance
But l'd like to start before that
to talk about the strength and the, and the
way of life that, that we had,
and sometimes it's difficult to, to talk fully
about who we are
because over the years we've lost a lot.
l had to learn U.S. history in a new way
Learning about the Marshall lslands in
particular,
the history of U.S. bomb testing on
Marshall lslands
A device with one-thousand times the
energy of the bomb that shattered
Hiroshima, exceeding the power of that
bomb as vastly as it exceeded,
the greatest high explosive giants of World
War ll.
There's a one long skinny island where
the U.S. military base is
and then there's this other island, called
Ebeye
where all of the folks of color live
and they come over during the day
and work in a lot of the service sector jobs,
and then go back at the end of the day,
and also have radiation,
from all of the bomb testing that
happened, you know,
in the mid-twentieth century. That was
something l had no idea about.
How many of our stories are left untold?
Buried under piles of dust waiting to be
forgotten
Can we truly forget them, or do they just
get told in other ways?
Fact. Racially, we are almost completely
the same.
Ask an anthropologist. We are all, every
people, less than . 1 % different
Other 99.9 is what makes us humankind,
Fact. The human psyche will do almost
anything to remove dissonance
Dissonance means that which is outside of
your comfort zone.
When l was really young, probably up until
the age of about eight or nine,
the social network, the relationships, the
family, friends,
were all mostly people of South Asian
descent
l wasn't self-aware of myself as a racial,
as a racial being
And then something shifted, and, at that
point,
l started rejecting my own culture,
community,
quite, l think quite drastically
And although there were so many people
of color that were around me,
l really wanted to be accepted and
assimilate with, with white people
l was taught to think that life that's worth
noticing and living,
is just a little wedge of the three hundred
and sixty degrees.
Now they didn't say it in so many words,
but l was taught there are these lines that
mark off the rest of the world,
and the rest of the world's people from
what is good,
and in my coming up as a child, again and
again, l heard phrases like,
"good families"
"good neighborhoods"
"good books"
"good music"
"good taste"
"good manners"
"good jobs"
"good investments"
Those "goods" demarcated what l was
meant to respect
and beyond which l was not meant to stir
The college l went to was really white and
really suburban
so l had to find like a small sector of
people l could hang out with
but most of those people were white.
l remember, l'll never forget this, l saw an
lndian person on T.V.
which back then was like unheard of, and
l'll be like
"Oh my God, there's an lndian person on
T.V." And they'll be like
"Well why is that such a big deal to you?"
And l'm like, "What are you talking about,
l'm , l'm lndian."
l remember when l didn't know l was
black.
My mother is black and white.
My grandmother is an lrish woman born
on a farm.
My mother had very, very, very light white
skin, freckles
and brown hair that fall straight.
So here she is a black girl growing up
without
the absolute black exterior, in a black
experience, in a black family.
Where she's too light, and, and white to be
cool with black children,
and too like black folks to be cool with
white children.
My father is black and from Tennessee,
and my mother l think because
(pause) though she was black didn't have
you know my sisters are brown skinned,
nappy headed girls, you know.
She couldn't, she couldn't fully understand
what that meant for us.
So my mother would tell us things like, you
know
"Yeah, you're, you're, you're black and,
and, and, and you're white
but more than anything you're um, you're,
you're a good person.
You're um, we have several, several
different cultures in us
and in our background and duhduhduh"
And l don't think she was deliberately
dodging the issue of race
but l think she, she couldn't fully
understand the impact of you know
no police officer they were pulling me over
and considered my racial mixture.
When l was a couple of days old l was
adopted
My birth parents are black-Colombians
and my adopted family was Caucasian
ln my parents' mind, l'm their child and
they're white
and, what does that make me?
And my adoptive father has talked about
what it was like for him
to have my birth father, a black man, come
to stay with them
in their house and come to church with us.
And for my adoptive dad to stand up and
introduce who my birth father was,
and he said, really it was in that space
when he really realized
that everyone else in the church was
looking at my birth dad,
and now suddenly at me as a black
person
and that was never something he'd had to
confront before
and suddenly he realized that that was
something that l as an adult
was connected to as well.
For me as a Latino,
l can choose to be one of multiple
identities.
So if l moved to Michigan without talking, l
could pass for Arab.
lf l move to California, l could pass for
Mexican.
lf l move to Florida, l could be Cuban and
Puerto Rican.
lf l'm in New York, l could be Dominican,
Puerto Rican
or anything as long as l'm not downtown.
That's where all the white folk hung out.
l had a girlfriend
who was raised in a black family on the
south side of Chicago
and she was the only mixed race person
in her family.
She ended up living in France for six years
with her sister
who ended up settling in France, and over
there
people there thought she was Moroccan
because there's a large Moroccan and
Algerian population
and so therefore in that environment she
was treated the way
North African women in France are
treated.
And she began to really identify with those
relationships
and her primary source of support and
ended up being Moroccan and Algerian
women.
So she started to really identify with that.
Then when she came back to the United
States
she had this experience where she would,
you know
black folks didn't totally accept her or they
did but they didn't really
understand the whole thing in France that
she'd experienced
and then white folks treated her like she
was black
and so she was moving between different
racial dynamics
in different social contexts, and somehow
l was able to relate to her.
And what it's helped me realize is that
identity is complex
how we navigate and negotiate it is
complex
and therefore l think we have to come up
with solutions
to how we navigate the complexity of our
identities
that are more flexible than the rigidness of
racism and race
BlAS
What is whiteness?
Growing up l thought that my experience
was the American experience,
and that everybody in the whole United
States had lived exactly,
lived exactly as l did.
And that's an experience where everybody
looked exactly like me
So l was born in Medford, Oregon,
and in Medford there were absolutely no
people of color,
within the city limits.
And then l met another woman, l mean
well she was a girl,
so we're 11 years old, and l meet another
person,
who then becomes my best friend and she
still is my best friend
And her name was Serena Maria Cruz,
right?
So Serena for me wasn't of color, she was
white
So we're graduating, we're signing up for
the PSAT to take the test,
and this is when we have gone to school
together for 5 or 6 years
And we've been to each other's houses,
we've had birthday parties
We're all involved in the same gifted
program activities
And she's filling out her, her form, and
filling out her race
and, and l'm filling out my form, and l look
over at Serena
and l see her filling out the bubble for
Hispanic, and so,
l actually reach out, and l grab her hand,
and l pull it up, and l tell her,
"Serena, you're supposed to fill out the
white bubble."
And she looks at me, and she says, she
says, she says,
"Look at me Susie." She says, "Look at
me" like this.
And l looked at her
and l didn't have any clue what she was
talking about.
l didn't know what she was talking about.
l think unconscious bias is really heavily
implicated,
in white America's racial attitudes in this
age of Obama so-to-speak
On the one hand, l think a lot of white
folks,
who actually admire President Obama a
lot, who voted for him
who find him to be an extremely erudite,
intelligent, capable leader.
Nonetheless, and we know this from the
studies,
many of those folks will indeed have
implicit associations
between black folks and negativity,
different stereotypes, different views,
and they've taken, many of them, the
implicit association tests
that had been run by Harvard and
Princeton and others
that can test for these sort of
subconscious biases.
And what those studies have found is 7 5%
of white Americans
have overtly pro-white anti-black bias.
Well, by definition, some of those folks
voted for Barack Obama
because he got about what, 44% of the
white vote, 45% .
So by definition, a large number of white
folks
who carry around this sort of baggage of
bias
are willing to carve out these exceptions
for those who make us comfortable, who
seem different from the norm
My ex-husband is a white man.
And he adores, and always has adored his
son.
There were things that happened to my
son in the communities
that he lived in because he was mixed
race
that forced him to learn to use both
intellect and humor.
However, l became aware, that as Noah
grew older
and would defend himself
his father would try to get him to defend
himself with anything but his fists
even when he was under attack.
And his dad was like, "Oh no no no, we
don't want him to be a bully.
We don't want him to stoop to their level.
l'm going to go and talk to the parents."
Well later we sat down, he and l, and had
a conversation, it's like,
"Well Noah's being hit, why shouldn't he
defend himself?
He's tried every other methodology that
we could think of,
and it hasn't worked, and so l think he has
the right to defend himself. "
What came out of that conversation was
outside of my husbands awareness,
because he loves me, and he loves his
son,
is he had a fear of angry black men.
He didn't want his son to be one of those
angry black men.
And he was doing everything that he could
to keep that from happening
even though it meant that Noah was
actually being,
"oppressed" and " abused" and
"stigmatized" at school.
We finally got to some of those early
messages about black boys
that still run like wild fire through our
educational systems
but it had also impacted my husband, and
he wasn't aware of it anymore.
l have internalized messages that support
what it means to be white for me.
And part of those messages are, l have
advice, right.
l have knowledge that, that is good
knowledge
that everybody deserves to have in order
to become like me.
So l, l can give advice and people will
value my advice,
and in particular l can give advice to
people of color.
Recently l was in a meeting
with a white woman, and an African
American woman
where the African American woman was
trying to explain to the white woman,
with me as a witness
that, what the white woman was doing
was very oppressive to her.
The African American woman took great
pains to be respectful
to be as articulate as she could, while
being kind at the same time
and really told a lot of stories
in the hopes that this white woman would
understand
in what ways she was oppressing her.
And each time that the African American
woman would tell her story
the white woman would say,
"No, you were wrong. No, you must not
understand what l was telling you
You obviously don't know me very well. l
would never do that."
l call this behavior of always being right
always thinking that you know better than
a person of color
always trying to make sure that things
work for you,
as internalized white superiority.
l rarely really understand when l'm
exhibiting behavior that is racist,
and internalized white superior in its
nature
When well-meaning white people who've
never thought about privileged systems
or whiteness, or race, start out,
the teaching is very necessary to get them
past blame, shame, and guilt
They were born into circumstances they
didn't invent
They're born into history they didn't invent
Rather then have them do the solipsistic
thing,
of getting all self-involved in this,
it's just very important to hold them,
while they get into a rational frame of
mind,
that the big systems exist that they didn't
know about,
they were born into them
The American myth of meritocracy doesn't
apply.
We were not taught history, but this is
history they're learning
And the American myth of meritocracy is
the unit of society,
is the individual, and whatever you end up
with,
must be what you wanted and worked for,
and earned and deserved individually.
They've been taught that
lt's not true - it's part way true.
Your individual effort from your own sacred
center does matter.
But, it's untrue, also, huge systems that
one's born into
will bear on what one can do with one's
life, and how one won't see.
And that's the part that has been missing
from that education.
So these white women breaking up over
their first experience
of hearing about racism, they are basket-
cases
partly because of their bad, bad,
education.
Their inability to see systemically, and it's
not their fault
But they need to be hustled past it
as quickly as possible with some remedial
words
which l think l've just spoken here.
You did not invent the systems you were
born into.
They are there, and you were taught not to
see them
and you're a very good student of what
you've been taught
ln a way my entire career l owe, to white
privilege
and l tell that story
not sort of as a matter of self-flagellation
or out of guilt.
l tell it because l want people to
understand
that there can be two things that are true
at once.
On the one hand we can work really hard,
but on the other hand
our hard work can be met by access to an
opportunity structure.
So it's not that l didn't work hard
it's not that my great-grandfather who
came here from Russia in
you know, the early part of the 1900's
a Jewish immigrant who didn't speak
English;
he worked eighteen hours a day. lt's not
that he didn't work hard
but he also had access to jobs that were
off limits to people of color
the day he got off the boat
lt's a lot easier to recognize how you're
different
and the doors are closed in your face
than it is to recognize how you're normal
and doors are open for you so that you
can step through them.
This is not a reality that is only held by
white people.
ln those areas where l am dominant, l just
assume
that the doors that are held open for me
are held open for me
because l'm such a fabulous human
being.
lt doesn't dawn on me
that l can have a conversation about my
dark complexion
and l can have a conversation about being
black
a woman.
So l don't have to deal with the fact that
because l'm educated
and l speak standard English
and l live a middle class existence
there are entitlements that l have that
other people don't .
There are entitlements that l have
because l'm heterosexual,
that some people don't .
There are entitlements that l have
because l'm U.S. born
that some people don't. And l don't have
to think about them.
And unless l take the blinders off and start
looking at the
interconnected nature of power and
abusive power in particular
l can't have this conversation.
And so, in the context of race
it shouldn't surprise us that white people
have a very difficult time having this
conversation
because they are not aware of the ways in
which they've been socialized
and acculturated to take their dominance
for granted
even when they're being, they think,
politically aware, politically astute
and moving a social justice agenda.
There's a way in which whiteness
and the normalcy of that whiteness,
and the superiority of that whiteness
shows up, that people are completely
unaware of.
My sister-in-law, who's half black half
white, but looks white:
blue eyes, whiter than most white folks,
very white.
She and l, you know, we kind of grew up
together.
We raised our children together so they're
first cousins
and you know, it's wonderful, very, very
multicultural family.
So we're going into Safeway, one day
and Kathleen, my sister-in-law is in front of
me.
And she's , you know, writing a check for
her groceries.
Now my daughter, who at the time was ten
years old
was standing with me, and l was directly
behind her
you know, getting ready to get my
groceries.
So, Kathleen comes up, and the checker
who's a strawberry blonde, freckled
very delightful, warm, you know, the
checker,
this young woman is talking to Kathleen
"Hey how you doing? lsn't it a nice day
today?"
They're just chatting up, and she says,
"Yes."
So Kathleen writes her check
and she steps off to the side with her
groceries
'cause she's waiting for me.
Of course again, Kathleen looks white
right?
So l come up.
No conversation, she looks up at me,
absolutely no just little chatter
and l, l write my check.
My daughter, however is ten, notices
immediately the difference
in how she responds to me.
So l write my check, and she goes, "l'm
gonna need two pieces of l.D."
At which point, my daughter looks at me
and she gets very, very embarrassed,
and tears are kind of coming up in her eye
like
"Mommy, you're not gonna, you're not
gonna let her do this?
Why is she doing this to us?" Right?
So l'm trying to figure out what l should do
'cause behind me are two elderly white
women. Right?
Now l'm thinking, okay, so then l become
the angry black woman, right?
And they're gonna be.
And l just, l'm just trying to second-guess
all the drama.
So then l, l just give her the two pieces of
l.D.
You know some things you just got to
choose your battles, right?
And then it gets worse
she pulls out the bad check book, right?
So this is the book that shows the people
who've written bad checks.
So she starts searching for my license in
the bad checks
at which point, it's just out of control now.
Just as l'm standing there
trying to decide what to do, and this is
really deeply humiliating
and now my daughter is in full blown
emotionally upset, who's ten.
My sister-in-law walks back over
and she steps in, and she says, "Excuse
me, why are you doing this?"
And the checker goes
"Why are you taking her through all of
these changes, why you doing that?"
She goes, "Well, um, this is our policy."
She goes, "No, it's not your policy
because you didn't do that with me."
"Oh well, l know you, you've been,"
she goes, "No, no, she's been here for
years.
l've only lived here for 3 months."
And so at this point, the two white elderly
ladies go
"Uh! l can't believe what this checker has
done with this woman
that is totally unacceptable!"
At which point, the manager walks over.
So the manager walks over and says, "ls
there a problem here?"
And then my sister-in-law again responds
she goes, "Yes, there is a problem here.
Here is what happened."
So you see, she used her white privilege
and even though Kathleen is half black
and half white
she recognizes what that means
and she made the statement
she pointed out the injustice
and she as a result of that one act
influenced everyone in that space.
But what would've happened?
l can't know for certain had the black
woman said
"This is unfair, why are you doing this to
me?"
Would it have had the same impact?
But Kathleen knew
that she walked through the world
differently than l did
and she used her white privilege to
educate
and make right a situation that was wrong.
That's what you can do, every single day
Well, within the black family
within the black community, there are
legacies of color
and most people felt that if you were
lighter skin
you would be more acceptable, and
accepted to the whiter culture.
But within the black community
many times, people who were lighter skin
were rejected.
My mother felt that, she was rejected by
my father's family.
And, so there was this it's a lot of different
layers of the skin thing.
Because within the white community
if you were lighter skin, you were more
acceptable.
But within the black community
if you were lighter skin, many times you
were rejected.
My assumptions were that light
complected women
had it much easier in the world than darker
complected women.
They were the women who were
considered beautiful.
They were the women that people made a
way for.
They were the people that look more like
white people
than l look like white people
so white people were more comfortable
with them.
So life flowed in an easier fashion for
them.
Until l actually got to know somebody
who was really, really, really, light
complected
and she laid out a reality that just broke
my heart.
She desperately wanted to be the color
that l was.
And basically what that taught me in terms
of
internalized oppression and internalized
colorism, is how carefully
we have been trained, culturally, to be
dissatisfied with our reality
as people of color or actually white folk as
well.
That the dissatisfaction is bread into the
culture
and it is part of the ways in which we are
oppressed
and the ways in which we oppress others.
l think one of the biggest disturbances
that l have about my dad in particular
has to do with his upset about how dark
he is.
l remember about ten years ago, and l'm
54, so this wasn't that long ago.
Ten years ago he was visiting, and he
showed me a picture of himself
when he was 4 years old.
Had never seen pictures of him when he
was young before
he never showed any photos of himself to
us.
And he showed me this picture, he was
four years old
he showed me this picture, and he says,
"Look at this."
l look at the picture, and it's this cute,
beautiful, four year old boy
dark, dark, dark, and they lived in the
desert.
They're even darker, right? So they lived
out there in desert.
Dark picture of this four year old, this cute
four year old,
and l said, "Dad, aww, you're so cute.
How come you haven't showed me these
pictures before
this is the first time l've seen em."
And he said, "Well look at it."
And l looked at it, and he says
"l look like a goddamn piece of charcoal."
Well l remember a time when l was six
and l was hanging out at my great-
grandmother's home.
And she's very white, very Spaniard, in her
appearance
And l was hanging out with another kid,
who was my age
a classmate who was black.
And when we went to the house,
l was so eager for him to try the
strawberry and chocolate grits.
You know, in Spanish it's farina, or avena
but in English, you know, it's the grits.
And l remember my great-grandmother
telling me
that he couldn't come into the house.
But l didn't know why
and l really didn't understand why until
later
after l became more conscious and
reflecting back, why it was.
And it was very simply because he was
black
and she didn't want her house, her floor,
her presence, tinted by blackness
l'm thinking of myself at age 1 4, you know
hanging out in the flower shop.
There's a white woman and a Latino
woman at the counter.
The Latino woman was there first.
And l choose to talk to the white woman.
And then you lose your own humanity, you
know, because, you know,
what's the humanity in treating someone
more poorly than another person?
Very early on l noticed that there was one
other African American boy
in the school and in my class.
Brocelius was treated just like l was, that
is that
none of the other boys and girls who were
white
And so l remember
there was one particular day, when he was
just trying to make friends.
l don't really remember what it was,
but l think it might've been in the
classroom during an art project.
And he said, you know
"Why don't you come on over? Why don't
we work on this with me?"
And l said, "No, l'm not going to. No, l'm
not going to."
And l walked away
and he actually followed me in the room
and started to break out in tears
because he knew, and l knew what l was
doing
but deep down inside at that point, it was
real clear to me
that he was somebody that l needed to
avoid
l know that l get challenged more in the
classroom than my
than my white colleagues.
ln fact, l actually taught a class with a
white colleague, so it was right there
We had the same set of students.
We were in the class at the same time
and l saw it day after day, that he would
say something
and had to give very little explanation that
followed
and they would all be fine with it.
And before, l would, you know say, "Well
this is your assignment,"
l'd have to make sure that l had everything
ready for
"Why are you asking us to do this?"
Being challenged on every level, with
grades, with assignments
so from the point of view of internalized
racism
l fall into the trap where l'm justifying
and l'm bending over backwards
and l have to remind myself that l'm here
because l have a expertise;
l have the experience, that's why l'm the
instructor.
l have to go there, because an automatic
reaction is to please
to help them along, that's the internalized
racism is
is not feeling that l'm , that l'm capable.
But l am capable.
When we look at American chattel slavery
which lasted for centuries
we're always told, "Don't talk about it.
Shut it down. Why? lt's over with now."
And what l understand as a healer, as a
clinician, you know, and as an educator,
is that it just doesn't go away.
So the question becomes
what does it look like now?
How did it get passed along?
What are some of the symptoms of this
thing l'm talking about
which l call post-traumatic slave
syndrome.
But it becomes adaptive behavior
things that lie just beneath the surface.
For example, l give this example because
it's such a good one.
l think people can kind of grasp it.
There are certain things like sayings
and things you grow up with that you just
take for granted.
"Mama said it," or, "Big Daddy said it," or,
"Pookie," somebody said it,
and it's just something you come to know.
l'll give you an example that there is, let's
say that there are two people
201 0, or in contemporary society that,
there're mother
two mothers, white mother, black mother
or it could be a white mother, a black
father, white father
it doesn't matter, it's not gender specific.
But you have these two individuals; they
have children.
Say these two mother's have two sons,
and these two sons play together.
They go to school together
they spend a night over at each other's
house.
They're best of friends, and they find
themselves
the mothers and the two sons, at a school
meeting.
The black mother and her son is seated
next to the white mother and her son
and so, the black mother leans over and
says to the white mother
"You know, your son's really doing well.
He's really coming along."
And she goes, "Well thank you," and she
begins to say
"Well did you know he's in the talented
and gifted
and did you know he won the science fair
and did you know his uncle was an
astronaut,"
because she's oozing with pride,
wonderful thing.
So then the white mother stops for a
moment and realizes
that the black mother's son is actually
excelling her son.
So she leans over to the black mother and
she goes
"What are you talking about? My son!
Now your son's the one that's really
coming along!"
And the black mother's response is, "Girl,
get out of here.
You should've seen that boy yesterday!
Eew wee, he's , eew that boy is, eew he's
a handful. Stop it!"
Now, the white mother's response is
"Wow, they're so negative. No wonder,
why are they so negative?"
Now, within our cultural adaptation and
norm
if you're African American, not even just
African, you could be from the Caribbean.
Black folks know that even though that
mother's going
"Girl get out of town, he's a mess," she's
really proud.
Everyone knows that, sort of, except
maybe her son.
So now let's take a look at this from a
different context
because that's not healthy behavior, okay.
And whether it's cultural or adaptive,
doesn't matter
lt's not healthy behavior.
Why isn't she praising him?
Why isn't she oozing like the white
mother?
Well let's roll it back a couple centuries.
And let's , now you have a black mother
that is seated, maybe at the table
cutting up onions, or she's working in the
fields, and she's enslaved,
and her children are with her.
And a white slave owner comes over
could be white woman, or white man, and
they say to that mother
"My, my, now that boy, that boy there, he
sure coming along."
What is she going to say? She gon' say
"No sir, no sir. He shiftless, he can't work,
he stupid."
'Cause l don't want you to sell my boy.
lf it's my daughter, l don't want you to
breed her.
So l denigrate them, to protect them.
That is called appropriate adaptation to
living in a hostile environment.
We never unlearned it, that's post-
traumatic slave syndrome.
And while we continue to move on, and we
continue to even excel despite it all,
there is some broken parts that we need
to fix
and we can't fix it if we don't look.
Can you point to in your own mind
some of the ways that you are oppressed
and oppressing?
l remember when l really was on this,
making this journey
and really making a commitment
that l wanted to heal from the disease l
had termed racism.
When you make a commitment like that
nature has a way of providing you with all
kinds of opportunities
So one day after work
l picked up my daughter
and we were on our way home.
She says, "Let's go have Chinese food."
So it was a Chinese restaurant right up the
street from where we lived.
So she and l went into the restaurant
waitresses was passing by us,
and they, nobody was really stopping.
And then l called one of them, l said
"l'd like to get an order to go," and she
says
"One moment." So she left, and she never
came back.
So l was sitting there, ten minutes had
passed
and l said, "Wait a minute."
So finally, an elderly woman was at the
counter
so l said, "Let me go up and talk to her."
So l walked up to her, and l was just
reading some stuff off
She wasn't writing anything down, and so l
finished my order
and then she looked at me and she said,
"We don't serve you people."
l looked at this woman, l said, "Look, you
know, it's okay."
l said, "You don't have to serve me."
l said, "But, l really want you to think about
what you're doing."
l said, "There are all kinds of people in the
world."
l said, "There are good black people and
bad black people.
Good Chinese people and bad Chinese
people.
Good white people and bad,"
and l, it was like l was having an out of
body experience.
l was looking deep into her eyes and she
was
it was like l had captured her, and she was
listening.
And l was sharing with her
l said, "But, l just want you to think about
the message
that you're sending to young people
by saying you don't serve you people.
Who are you people?"
When 9/11 happened
l had a lot of context about the history of
racism in our country.
And immediately l recognized there was
gonna be a shift in our society
and there was gonna be a focus on our
community
the Muslim community in the United
States.
And there was going to be an enormous
amount of backlash.
All of a sudden it became, "We are the
enemy."
What l saw with a lot of white folks was
Muslim people in this society went from
being completely unknown to
"l have a very specific idea about who you
are."
Muslim people are overwhelmingly viewed
to be people of color.
And- And so as a result, there's a racial
dynamic there.
And also l think it's been interesting
because l think that there is a concerted
effort
to make us foreign and the other
Frank Rich, who again, is a fairly liberal
columnist
and wrote a piece, l think it was in the
New York Times
right after or right before the election
where he said that, you know
basically racism is not a problem anymore
because when white folks get to know
black folks well
their biases and their fears subside.
Now, number one, l'm not sure that's true
but secondly, even if it were true, the truth
is
given the history of racism, spatial
segregation, residential isolation
the fact that 85% of white folks live in
communities
with virtually no people of color around
even if he were right
it wouldn't matter because most white
folks
won't get that opportunity to actually form
close
intimate friendships or connections with
people of color.
And unfortunately, if it isn't happening
the only way we get to know folks of color
is via media.
So, maybe we see Barack Obama on
television
coming into our living rooms every night
and over a 18 month to two year period
we're able to say
"Yeah you know, l sorta like that guy
he seems really capable and really bright.
Maybe l wasn't sure at first but given two
years he was able to overcome
you know, maybe my first impression."
But the only other folks we're seeing in the
media
are either folks who are sort of superstars,
on the one hand
or criminals on the other hand.
Those are the black folks we typically see
on T.V.
They're either like mega-millionaire
athletes or entertainers
or they're the folks doing a perp walk
on the 6 o'clock news, that the cops had
just gone arrested
and haven't even let them put a shirt on
before cuffing them and bringing them out
in front of the cameras.
are superstar millionaires and thugs
for the average person, they can't relate to
either of those, right?
The average person of color can't
and the average white person can't either.
and the thug you're afraid of.
And envy and fear are not particularly
good human emotions
upon which to base some personal
connections or intimate relationships.
So l think that's what we're dealing with,
you know
Barack Obama, or Bill Cosby, or Oprah
Winfrey
are a handful people of color, we're able to
get to know them
or at least we think we know them, via
media.
But for average everyday white folks
and for average everyday black and brown
folks
the ability to really get to know each other
and overcome those implicit biases is a lot
more rare
and somehow l ended up in this sociology
class
where there were, it was a small class.
lt was about maybe 1 50 students.
And most classes were at least 4 and 500
students.
And the professor was a WASP, and really
growing up in the south, l really didn't
know what a WASP was, you know.
And, and so the professor, the first day of
class, he said
how many WASPs were in the classroom?
And so l was looking around,
'cause l was looking for this, like, wasp
that sting people.
And so as l was looking around
l saw people raising their hands.
And finally l raised my hand.
But l was raising my hand to ask a
question.
And the professor knew l wasn't a WASP.
So he looked at me, he said, "How may l
help you?"
And then he said, "You!"
And l said, "Yes, um, what is a WASP?"
And so he looked at me with such disdain
and such venom
he said, "White Anglo-Saxon Protestant, of
course."
And then everybody in the class laughed
and when they all laughed l was just like,
you know
l felt horrible, and l sank down in my seat
and that's when l realized that to speak
was not the right thing to do.
That interpersonal level is when we're
making decisions,
and what we're going to make possible or
not possible for them.
That's when as a teacher, for example
if you have a young black kid who's having
a hard time settling down
you're making decisions based on your
beliefs
about whether that kid needs a little bit
more attention
or that kid needs to be sent to special
education
or that kid needs to be expelled from the
school because he can't act right
At the institutional level
we see racism play out in the, both the
written rules
and the unwritten rules of that institution.
l went to Lionel Wilson College
Preparatory Academy.
First high school built in Oakland in 40
years.
Funded by many donations it was clearly
not no ghetto school.
Though they placed us in the middle of
Sobrante Park
East Oakland, on 1 05th.
For those who missing this, that would be
the ghetto.
So those who ran it were continuously
shocked and appalled
at the daily tagging appearing in the halls.
The block signs scraped into walls
and the rocks tossed so frequently through
windows.
What did they expect?
Shudda known you can't take the ghetto
out a kid
even if you place them in a clean cut
environment
because they will do anything to remove
dissonance.
So when you're used to crack vials lining
your walkways
and everything you own is a step past
shitty
you really ain't trying to see nothing pretty.
A white boy who walks in the room, and is
animated
and moving around, and maybe even a
little cheeky
is smart, and, "lsn't he smart, isn't he
cheeky?"
He's almost looked at as, "Well boys will
be boys."
A child, a boy of color, especially an
African American boy
who walks in the room exhibiting the same
behavior
walks in and it's , "Hmm, l might need to
keep an eye on him."
We are afraid, of these young boys
and l'm talking young boys, four years-old
and above.
And that, instead of the teacher looking at
him or herself and saying
"What is going on with me
that this same behavior creates fear in me
instead of admiration?"
We pathologize the boy of color.
"Jumpshot!"
"No, look, l just, l want to get over there."
"Dance."
"No listen, l, l just need to get over there."
"Crack!"
"No, l'm sorry look, l, l, l just want to get
over there."
"Rap."
"No, l need to get over there!"
"Hey man show me your jumpshot! C'mon,
rap for me, c'mon.
There was no place for us in school.
l would argue that the greatest waste of
time in my life
was the four years l spent in high school.
And this is coming from an educator
that there was, from the food we were fed
to the only way we were really accepted in
school, you know.
The black boys are the mascots of any
high school
that they're in where l grew up.
l don't know about other places
l see it now at Universities where like the
black dudes are you know
they're the provocative part of your
experience
in high school or college or in the work
place, you know.
And for me it just, it didn't speak to me.
Race always deals with boxes, right?
And l think when we are
so let's say, you grow up in the suburbs,
you know?
Or you grow up in an affluent area in a
city,
that has an affluent area and a ghetto
but you're black, a black boy.
And you, so you get to school
and there's a box for you.
And that box says
"you rap
you're an athlete,
you're slightly to highly misbehaved.
You're not involved or into your education
that much.
You sell and or use drugs."
That's the box that you're accepted in.
And in order to play ball, no pun intended
That's how you interact with yourself, your
own identity
and this is how you're cool.
But you feel like, the box that it traps you
in
if you feel like, to be healthier
to be in a more sound mind state
to think and know and come from a place
of foundation in your life
is something that you have to be ashamed
of
and you have to denounce
it can drive you crazy.
Boy is born.
He's beautiful, as everyone is.
He's brown, like his parents.
He is loved.
He grows.
One day coming from school, cops stop
boy.
Cops do not love boy.
Tell boy so.
Call him stupid.
Bad, stupid. Ugly, brown, black, black,
brown, ugly.
Call him stupid.
Bad. Ugly.
T.V. tells boy, what cop say, true.
Teacher show boy, they believe what cop
say, true.
News say, tube say, people say
seem like even steeple say
what cop say, true.
Boy blue
You know when l get the occasion
and l don't get it very often to sit down
and do trainings or workshops with law
enforcement officers
one of the things that l do usually
in the first five minutes is to ask them
you know, "What's the very first thing you
think
when you see a young black or Latino
male
driving a nice car in your community?"
And almost invariably and with very few
exceptions
including among the officers of color, they
will respond
"Probably a drug dealer."
l will then ask them, next question
"When you see a young white male, same
age
driving the same kind of car in your
community
what is the first thing you think?"
And almost every time, without exception
including among the officers of color, they
will say
"Spoiled little rich kid. Daddy probably
bought him a car."
Now on the one level, you know
we've been together for five minutes, me
and these cops
we got a two hour workshop, three hour
workshop coming
and they've already outed themselves
fundamentally
as racist in the sense that they've
acknowledged their perception
which is solely based on skin color, is one
that is negative toward
in this case, black or brown kids.
How is that going to manifest?
Well logic tells you
that if you're a police officer who has that
reaction
you may not like the spoiled little rich kid
either.
ln fact you probably don't .
But you're not going to hassle him
because you're afraid his daddy might
have some power.
On the other hand, if you think the black or
brown kid is a dealer
you're going to stop him.
You're going to search him.
You're probably not going to find anything
according to the data
but now you're going to have his name in
the system.
You're going to be on the lookout for his
car.
You're able to in effect tag him as a
possible wrong doer
and then, that's how these folks get
caught up
young black and brown men in particular,
in the system being harassed over and
over and over again
while the white folks, according to the data
are the ones more likely to have drugs in
their car
more likely to bring drugs through airports.
The ones who are the least suspected
are the ones who are actually most likely
to be guilty
So you have the combination of personal
bias
and the reality then of systemic
mistreatment
and then the irony of it all, is it actually
leads you astray
and doesn't allow you to do your job
effectively.
lf you're a cop, thinks the black or brown
kids got drugs
and the white kid has drugs
you're not even doing your job well
So at some level, you know
these personal biases not only affect
systemic behavior
but they actually have profound, larger,
social consequences
in that our criminal justice resources
are really deployed in the completely
wrong areas
So a good example is our current
foreclosure crisis and the housing crisis.
What happened there is that, 30, 40 years
ago
you had banks making very explicit racial
decisions
not to loan to people of color, and
particularly
not to loan to people who are trying to
integrate neighborhoods.
That kind of explicit racism
was outlawed by the community
reinvestment act
and by some other civil rights laws.
But what came up in their place
is a whole range of new financial
institutions.
And those folks began to make
what are now known as, subprime loans
and they went to the communities
that had very little access to traditional
mortgages.
Their behavior, their lending practices,
created a racist impact;
it created a tremendous lost of wealth
and a huge foreclosure crisis in
communities of color
but we couldn't address it because they
weren't saying, explicitly
"We're targeting these people because of
their race."
So, we need to have a sense of racism
as it works through our rules and
regulations,
or our lack of rules and regulations
even if no one is intentionally trying to be
racist.
There is, a sort of seductive myth
and undercurrent of this whole idea of
post-raciality that
like, the answer is, everyone should have,
you know
relationships across race and then
everything is gonna go away.
Particularly in the Bay, you know, you get
that.
You see a lot of couples who are raced
differently.
and there's lots of beautiful babies
everywhere.
And so some people would point to that as
like
hey, mountain top, here we are.
And l think that
so often we talk about the interpersonal
when it comes to race
when we need to be talking about the
structural also.
ln all the social justice work l've done
as l look at who is making the decision
about
that transportation project, that job-training
program.
Very rarely, do the people who are making
the decisions
come from the communities that those
decisions are going to impact.
So they are not representative of those
communities
and more often than not
they're also not even responsive to those
communities.
l really became so focused on
the different access to resources and
opportunities
that different people have, and how that
influences
what happens generation after generation
after generation.
What makes places the places that they
are?
And who decided that, and where's the
money going?
At the structural level
you're understanding the relationship
between those different kinds of
institutions.
So, you understand that housing
segregation, for example
affects school financing, and so, housing
segregation
is going to generate segregation in
schools
and it's gonna generate uneven education
for kids of color.
And so if you only try to intervene in
education
with the education institutions
you're only gonna make limited progress
because we know
that the housing institutions also affect
what happens in schools.
l like the idea of living in a multi-racial
community
so that my children can get to know lots of
different people
and feel comfortable in all these different
cultures
and be able to go out into the world
comfortable with that.
But on the other hand, l'm also
challenged,
because l really need my child to have a
really good education.
And so in order to have a good education
they need to live in a neighborhood where
they can go to a good school.
And a good school is determined
by how much tax that school is able to
collect.
And l have to make choices about that
so then, say l make the decision to buy a
house
in a good neighborhood so my child has a
good education.
Chances are that neighborhood is less
racially diverse.
Then that means that my child will not
have
the same kinds of interracial experiences
growing up
that l had living in a city when my parents
had fewer choices
that were related to my fathers
immigration status, or not status
but the fact that he was an immigrant
and that it was harder for him to find good
work
which limited where we could live.
l may value racial diversity
but given that wealth and access to
schooling
is so closely linked to home-ownership in
this society
l don't have to be racist in the traditional
sense of the word
of not liking somebody who's not like
myself
to actually be carrying on that tradition.
Structural racism, you know, the first part
of it is
that you're looking multiple institutions
and you're looking at the culture
the morals, the aspirations
the ideas, the language
the images,
all of those things that comprise a culture
but the other parts are that,
you're paying very serious attention to
history
because that's the way structural racism
works
that history matters.
So l'm 21 , right
and l find out that there's this distant
relative of mine,
who, once upon a time, was the governor
of Mississippi.
J.P. Coleman, he's the governor between
1 956 and 1960.
Mind you, he was elected into office four
months after Brown ll.
And one of the first things he did
was set up the state sovereignty
commission
and sort of be in cahoots with the citizens
council
and try to use the law to preserve
Mississippi's way of life
to subvert Brown through aracial legalistic
means.
ln the archives l was reading this letter
that, to me, echoed
of a sort of Ward Connerly colorblind
approach to the law
as a way to ensure that racialized
hierarchies of power
continue and are upheld.
And the letter was basically one of, you
know
in 1956 Mississippi, looking to remove the
language of race from the law,
so as to maintain segregated schools.
ln my opinion it was, you know, incredibly
insidious
but also what made it so that by the end of
his term
there were still separate schools.
The reality is if you're not part of the power
structure
you're not one of the ones making the
decision
l think you're hyper-aware of what's
happening.
You're hyper-aware of the decisions that
are being made
and how they impact you
and for the folks who are in positions of
power, they're not
they don't need to think about it.
They don't need to critique it, it works for
them.
As long as we're being taught that where
you end up is about your effort
then the fact of inequality between groups
of people,
is gonna come to be seen as natural
evidence
of some people's superiority, and other
people's inferiority.
Because if you don't educate folks
because you figure it's just wasting money.
lf you don't provide equal job opportunity
or equal housing opportunity
and you don't really care if there's
disproportionate incarceration
because you think "those folks are all bad
anyway,"
then you create this sort of snowball affect
where the uneducated and those who
can't find housing
and those who can't find jobs
will almost invariably have to find
someway to survive
and that will involve in some cases
criminal activity
which then will land them in jail.
When they get out of jail
60% of employers say they won't hire
anyone
who they know to be an ex-con, right?
So ultimately, we sort of keep this system
in place
by a combination of actual practices in the
job market
the school system, etc.
But also the underlying ideological glue of
the society.
The system of inequity is embedded in
history, culture, and identity.
lt has internal components and external
components.
These components are moved or
influenced by power and economics.
The internal components
consist of bias, privilege, and internalized
racism.
The external components
play out in relationships
which are interpersonal, institutional, and
structural.
All of these layers are happening
simultaneously.
And they are churning out inequities.
At the level of structures and institutions
we don't talk about division of resources.
We don't talk about larger structures of
schooling and workforce.
We don't talk about the whole system of
racism
and that's the problem.
What we owe to ourselves and each other
is to have authentic, clear conversations
We could actually get to somewhere so
fundamental
that the needs of human beings are more
important
than the desire for profit.
Or that our individual good
is not above the common good, that we
actually work together.
What a bold and exciting way to organize
your society.
l like to go see movies.
Everybody knows l'm a movie person.
But l always go to see movies that aren't
They're just fantastic, kind of
you know, cinematography stuff.
l don't want reality, 'cause l deal too much
with reality
At this particular time it was King Kong, my
fault, l own it
l go to see King Kong, and the only reason
why l,
you know, of course l had seen it, the
earlier versions.
But the cinematography for this new one
was phenomenal
all the mechanics, and all the new stuff.
King Kong was doing all kinds of amazing
stuff.
So l decided l was gonna go.
So l'm in, l don't know, Baltimore
l don't know where l am, traveling.
And l'm with this friend of mine name
Dennis.
So we go in.
l didn't realize the movie was three hours,
first of all.
l had to go to the bathroom when l got in,
so l had to get out.
So l'm trying to figure out, when during the
movie do l run out.
So l decided it's a big bug scene, Jurassic
bugs.
l don't like little bugs, certainly don't like
big ones.
So l decided this is a good time to run out.
So l run out, and as l'm running out, this
young-
This is like the first day of opening
so there's like five theatres of King Kong.
So this guy runs out with his son, white
man
he's like mid-30s and he's got his son,
looks about eight or ten.
So they're running out and l'm going
"Whoa, that was out of control. The bug
scene."
He goes, "Oh boy was it!"
l said, "Yeah, that was clearly the worst
part so far."
So the father runs in, but his son stops
and goes
"Yeah l didn't like those black people."
And l'm going, "Why me? ls it me?
Do l have like a sign on me?" Right!
And then the kid runs in the bathroom.
So l go back in the show, and l say, tell
Dennis what just happened
and Dennis falls out laughing
he goes, "Joy this only happens to you."
And l'm going, "But l just," because there's
a scene, where there-
And here's the thing about it
this is so amazing about the scene.
There's a scene of cannibals
They're all kind of people.
And they're, you know right, they got to be
politically correct.
So you had Asians
and they zoomed in so you could see
even the main character was a blonde
woman with blue eyes.
But they're physically, were all black
even though they represented different
ethnicities.
'Cause you know, they couldn't have all
black people in there
not in, you know, this age.
But the little boy, he couldn't see that
subtlety.
So l'm sitting there, now upset, 'cause l
couldn't process.
And Dennis goes, "Joy you can't process
this, it's over.
lt's done. There are thousands of people.
You're never going to be able to fix this."
Right
So l'm sitting here
l'm messed up for the rest of the movie.
So the movie is over
we walk out, and there are droves of
people coming out.
And who do you think is standing there
leaning on the rail,
was this man and his son.
And l say "Dennis, this is the man."
He goes, "No way!"
l say, "Yes way. That's him!"
So l walk over to the man and l said, "Do
you remember me?"
He says, "Yeah, you ran out during the
bug scene."
Well they were waiting for the daughter to
come out of the bathroom.
That's why they were leaning and waiting
at the rail.
l said, "Can l ask your son something?"
He says, "Certainly."
So l say to the little boy, l said
"You know, now that you've seen the
whole movie,"
you know, because King Kong bites it in
the end
l'm figuring that's pretty bad.
l say, "What do you think the worst part of
the movie was now?"
He goes, "Those black people."
And his father goes
"Whoa." You know.
"Uh, uh, you know, l'm sure, well, yeah-
ahhh, they were."
You know he was so, the father
l said, "Listen l know your son is not a
Nazi, don't worry about it.
That, that's not what the issue is."
And the son runs off, l said
"The issue here is that, they weren't all
black people.
But that's his image, because you see
it wasn't the monsters that are horrific
it was those people were.
And that's the image in his mind
and he's so young, he couldn't see that
they were actually different groups of
people as those cannibals.
He only saw black people."
And his father, you could just see he was
tortured.
He says, "l, l just," he says, "l don't know.
This problem is so big l don't know if we
could ever make it right."
And l said, "You see, now we're having
another conversation," he and l.
He goes, "lt's just so big, l don't know if we
can make it right."
l said, "Perhaps." l said, "l have to believe
that we can."
and now he has his son and his daughter
and he's disturbed though, you can tell.
And he's walking away
and Dennis looks at me, and l look at
Dennis
and he gets to the escalator, and he stops
and he takes both of his children
and he turns around, and he walks back to
me.
And he says, "But l will make it right with
them
because l can make it right with them."
You see, that's , that's where the healing
begins
You know. That's where. Those moments.
Looking well in these books l see
nothing in them rings a bell.
Oh how l wish they'd speak to me
and my grandmother with the stories she'd
tell
My family has refrained you see,
from causing up a stir
They've been trained not to mention all the
rape and the death
making my history just a blur
So perhaps that is why you feel no shame,
just giving me one page
Erasing the source of my family's real
name,
to prevent me from tracing their rage
And you ask me why
there's hopelessness and there's
blindness
in the young ghetto children's eye.
Well any strong tree uplifted and stripped
of roots,
eventually will wither and die
Yes any strong tree uplifted and stripped
of roots,
eventually will wither and die
And looking within these books l see,
nothing in them rings a bell
Oh how l wish they'd speak to me..
and my grandmother with the stories she'd
tell
Oh how l wish they spoke to me..
and my grandmother with the stories she'd
tell
Heya, heyya,
ho metquiasin,
Freedom, oh freedom,
can you imagine that?
Freedom oh freedom,
To make a job,
not just take a job,
to love the work l do
Happiness, togetherness,
with love from me or to you
To lift up your voice,
to shout and sing,
until we have and heaven rings,
with harmony, with liberty,
from sea to shining sea
Free. . .freedom. Freedom. . .oh... freedom
Oh. . .can you. . ..Can you imagine that?
Freedom. . .oh freedom,
Can you imagine that?
Take some pride in yourself. . .in yourself
Believe in yourself,
Take pride, take pride. . . in yourself,
Have faith in yourself,
Have freedom. . .faith in. . .oh. . .freedom,
oh. . .freedom,
Oh freedom. . .can you imagine that?
Can you imagine freedom?
Can you imagine?. . .Oh freedom,